Radiation quantities are frequently required by users of ECMWF data, but there is often confusion about
the interpretation of the variables available in the ECMWF Meteorological Archiving System (MARS). This
document describes what is presently archived by the operational model, illustrates the various ﬁelds obtainable
via a MARS retrieval and explains how they should be interpreted.
The following conventions are employed in the storage of ﬂuxes by the ECMWF model:
1. Archived ﬂuxes are either downward or net. Energy entering the Earth’s atmosphere-surface system is taken
as a positive quantity, and therefore downward ﬂuxes are positive and net ﬂux refers to the downward ﬂux
minus the upward ﬂux. To obtain the upward ﬂux (Fup) from the downward ﬂux (Fdn) and net ﬂux (Fnet),
use Fup = Fdn −Fnet.
2. Physical ﬂuxes archived by the ECMWF model are accumulated since the start of the relevant forecast, and
therefore in units of J m−2 (or W m−2 s). Thus, a daily mean (in W m−2) is obtained by retrieving the
accumulated ﬂuxes at t1 = t and t2 = t + 24 hours (where t is the time of the start of the average), taking the
difference and dividing by 86400, the number of seconds in a day.
3. Clear-sky quantities are computed for exactly the same atmospheric conditions of temperature, humidity,
ozone, trace gases and aerosol, but assuming that the clouds are not there.
4. Solar or short-wave refers to radiation emitted by the Sun, then scattered, absorbed or transmitted by the
atmosphere and reﬂected or absorbed by the surface. It corresponds roughly to the 0.2–4 µm or 50,000–2600
cm−1 part of the spectrum. Thermal, terrestrial or long-wave refers to radiation emitted and absorbed by
the surface or by gases, clouds and particles within the atmosphere. It corresponds roughly to the 4–100 µm
or 2600–10 cm−1 part of the spectrum. Note that there is some spectral overlap between the two, which is
fully represented in the model, so the division between solar and thermal radiation should not be thought of
as simply radiation with a wavelength shorter or longer than 4 µm, but rather as radiation originating from
the sun versus originating from emission by the Earth or its atmosphere.
To help explain the surface and top-of-atmosphere (TOA) accumulated ﬂuxes that are archived, Fig. 1 depicts the
radiative energy ﬂows in the atmosphere. The ﬁelds available at TOA, corresponding to the 0 hPa pressure level,
are listed in Table 1, with the symbols corresponding to those shown in Fig. 1.
A frequently required quantity from global models is Outgoing Long-wave Radiation (OLR), represented in
TOA. The ECMWF model assumes that there is no incoming TOA radiation from any other source than
TOA = 0 (this neglects the 2.73 K cosmic microwave background, which amounts to only 3 µW m−2).
Therefore, the net long-wave radiation at TOA (named “TTR” in MARS) is equal to the negative of outgoing
long-wave radiation, so OLR = −TTR.
Figure 1: Schematic of the short-wave and long-wave radiative energy ﬂows in the atmosphere. The symbols for upwelling
and downwelling ﬂuxes at the top-of-atmosphere (TOA) and surface are used in Tables 1 and 2 to explain what is available
from MARS.
Table 1: The ﬁelds available from MARS at the top-of-atmosphere (TOA). All are ﬂuxes accumulated since the start of the
forecast, in J m−2. The symbols/equations are as shown in Fig. 1. Note that since the small downward long-wave (non-solar)
ﬂux from space is neglected (i.e. Ldn
TOA = 0), TTR and TTRC represent the negative of the outgoing longwave radiation Lup
TOA.
*Denotes a ﬁeld available from the reanalysis but not from the operational system.
The accumulated ﬂuxes available at the surface are shown in Table 2. There are several points to note:
• All quantities are at ground level in the model, according to the model’s representation of orography. Some
users ask if this is somehow corrected to be the value that would be observed at mean sea level if the Earth
had no orography. The answer is no.
• To a reasonably good approximation, SSRD can be considered to be what would be measured by a global
pyranometer at the surface, and SSRD−FDIR can be considered to be what would be measured by a diffuse
pyranometer. But be aware that the direct (i.e. unscattered) solar radiation in the model actually includes
radiation that has been scattered by cloud particles by a fraction of a degree, since the scattering pattern of
cloud particles has a narrow peak in the forward direction and it is most efﬁcient and accurate to treat this
radiation as if it had not been scattered at all. A further point is that the diffuse downwelling radiation from
the model includes diffuse radiation in the direction of the sun, which would be excluded from the radiation
measured by a diffuse pyranometer that uses a shadow band to exclude direct radiation. We assume that users
who wish to compare direct and diffuse radiation measurements to model output are aware of the correction
procedures that should be made to diffuse radiation measurements to account for this effect.
• All ﬂuxes, including direct ﬂuxes, at the surface and top-of-atmosphere represent the energy (in J) that has
passed through a square-metre of a ﬂat horizontal plane since the start of the forecast. This differs from
Table 2: The surface ﬂuxes accumulated since the start of the forecast that are available from MARS. All are in J m−2. The
symbols/equations are as shown in Fig. 1.
the ﬂux reported by a pyrheliometer pointing directly at the sun, which measures energy into a plane ori-
ented perpendicular to the incoming unscattered solar radiation. To convert an instantaneous pyrheliometer
ﬂux to the ﬂux into a ﬂat horizontal plane, multiply it by cos(θ0), where θ0 is the solar zenith angle. Con-
verting direct ﬂuxes in the model to the pyranometer convention is not straightforward since the ﬂuxes are
accumulated over a period during which the solar zenith angle changes.
The albedos available from MARS are listed in Table 3. To interpret them we ﬁrst discuss brieﬂy how albedo is
calculated in the model (valid since model cycle CY32R2). The basic land albedo is calculated from a monthly
climatology derived from the MODIS satellite instrument, which has four components: albedos are speciﬁed
separately for wavelengths shorter than and longer than 0.7 µm, and separately for direct and diffuse radiation.
The quantities ALUVP, ALUVD, ALNIP and ALNID in Table 3 are the four components of the land-surface
albedo interpolated to the start time of the forecast from the monthly means bracketing this time in the MODIS
climatology. They do not include the effects of snow, and are only available at the start of the forecast.
At each timestep within the model, these four albedos are modiﬁed to add the contribution from lying snow,
which is a dynamic variable in the model. They are then used by the radiation scheme, and the fact that four
variables are used means that the total amount of radiation reﬂected from the surface will depend on cloud cover
(which affects the ratio between direct and diffuse surface radiation), trace gas concentrations (which affects the
ratio between surface downwelling radiation with wavelengths greater than and less than 0.7 µm) and solar zenith
angle (which affects both).
At each timestep an additional instantaneous broadband albedo is computed for diagnostic purposes only,
and stored in MARS as “FAL”, as indicated in Table 3. This variable includes the contribution from snow and sea-
ice, but is computed as a weighted average of the diffuse albedos in the UV-visible and the near-infrared, weighted
according to the ﬁxed top-of-atmosphere spectral distribution of incoming solar radiation rather than the variable
Table 3: The surface albedo quantities available from MARS. All are non-dimensional and lie in the interval 0–1. The
components ALUVP, ALUVD, ALNIP and ALNID are deﬁned at land points only, and are only available in MARS at the start
of the forecast.
surface spectral distribution. The neglect of the difference between diffuse and direct radiation, and the use of a
ﬁxed spectral weighting, means that FAL differs somewhat from the true broadband all-sky albedo in the model,
surf.
Noticeable differences between FAL and α occur particularly over snow and ice where there is a large difference
in albedo between the two spectral regions (see Fig. 7).
Users who wish to know α as deﬁned by Eq. 1 are advised to calculate it directly from the archived surface
ﬂuxes. From Eq. 1 and the deﬁnitions in Table 2, albedo is given by α = 1 −SSR/SSRD. Since SSR and SSRD
are accumulated, this will give the effective albedo averaged over the duration of the forecast up to that point in
time. Of course, it will only produce reliable results over points that have been sunlit at some point during the
forecast up to that point, i.e. SSRD > 0.
Users who wish to separate the clear-sky surface net shortwave ﬂux, SSRC, into upwelling and downwelling
components can do this to a reasonable degree of accuracy using either FAL or α, but should note that neither would
reproduce perfectly what was in the clear-sky part of the original radiation calculation. This is because the absence
of clouds would lead to a greater fraction of the downwelling surface radiation being direct rather than diffuse,
thereby changing the weighting between the direct and diffuse components of albedo.
Sunshine duration archived from the ECMWF model is deﬁned as the number of seconds since the start of the
forecast that the direct downwelling solar ﬂux into a horizontal plane at the surface exceeded 120 W m−2. It is
therefore an accumulated ﬁeld. Unfortunately this differs from the ofﬁcial deﬁnition of sunshine duration, which
is the same but for direct solar ﬂux into a plane perpendicular to the sun. This ﬂux is larger than the ﬂux into
a horizontal plane by a factor of 1/ cos(θ0) (where θ0 is the solar zenith angle), so the sunshine duration from
ECMWF may be underestimated. Therefore it is recommended that this variable is not used.
In the following pages, all radiation ﬂuxes quantities are presented averaged over the ﬁrst 24-hours of the opera-
tional forecast started at 20120215 12 UTC, therefore as averages over the period 20120215 12 UTC to 20120216
12 UTC. The albedo components (Fig. 7) are given at the start of the forecast, 20120215 12 UTC, whereas the
surface albedo of Fig. 6 is the value 24 hours into the forecast, thus corresponding to 20120216 12 UTC. Please
also note that all albedo components are archived as non-dimensional within the interval 0–1, but are presented in
percent in Figures 6 and 7.
This document was written by Jean-Jacques Morcrette and Robin Hogan with contributions from other members
of the Physical Aspects and User Support Sections at ECMWF.
Figure 2: TSR, TSRC, TTR and TTRC averaged over the ﬁrst 24 hours of the forecast started on 20120215 12 UTC (W m−2).
Figure 3: SSR, SSRC and SSRD averaged over the ﬁrst 24 hours of the forecast started on 20120215 12 UTC (W m−2).
Figure 4: FDIR and CDIR averaged over the ﬁrst 24 hours of the forecast started on 20120215 12 UTC (W m−2).
Figure 5: STR, STRC and STRD averaged over the ﬁrst 24 hours of the forecast started on 20120215 12 UTC (W m−2).
Figure 6: FAL, the forecast albedo, after 24 hours for the forecast started on 20120215 12 UTC (%).
Figure 7: ALUVP, ALUVD, ALNIP and ALNID as used in the forecast started on 20120